---
title: "Economics Lecture 5 Interrelated Energy Markets"
date: 2020-09-14
categories:
- Energy Economics
tags:
- DTU Courses
---
A summary from the course notes.

## Cost-pass_through
From extracting to selling a fuel, there are many stages. There are:
- Extraction
- Crude transportation
- Terminaling
- Refining
- Sales transport

Profits generated and taxes paid at each step. Each stage passes its cost to the next one. So the impact of the raw resource price is limited.

Market power also comes into play. For example, the OPEC(Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries), is a supply side cartel created in the 60's and controls close to 40% of global oil production today, and also close to 70% of the world's _proven_ reserves. They can modify the price.

Their eective power has receded slightly (trust and non-OPEC production expansion).

## Substitution
I  many situations it is possible to substitute one fuel for another. For example, we can use gas oil or wood pellets for heating. If the price os the gas oil increase, more people will use wood pellets instead. The price of wood pellets will then increase.

The change of prices depends on how easy it is to shift(legislation, physical space available,investment costs), and the time horizon(how long dows the price change lasts), and the magnitue of price difference.

> Shift in demand across subtitutes means that prices will be correlated.

## Cross-price elasticities

Changes in the price of a good affects both the demand of the good and its subtitutes. **Price Elasticity** is used to measure this relation quantitatively.

> A measure of the precentage change in demand produced by a 1% change in price.

It can link the demand of the good with the price of itself (own elasticity) or the price of another good(cross elasticity). 

In mathematical form:
- Own price elasticity of demand:
$$\frac{\Delta D_x}{D_x} / \frac{\Delta p_x}{p_x}$$
- Cross price elasticity of demand:
$$\frac{\Delta D_x}{D_x} / \frac{\Delta p_y}{p_y}$$

where $D_x$ is the demand of good $x$, and $p_x$ is the price of good x.

In general, own elasticity is negative while cross elasticity can be plus(substitutes: coffee-tea, butter-margarine), minus(components: coffee-sugar, cars-gasoline) and zero(independent: books-beers, pencils-potatoes).

The higher the absolute value of the elasticity, the more significant the effect.

**Exercise:**
Consider the markets for gas-oil and wood pellets for residential heating, where the cross price elasticity with wood pellets is 2.
If the gas-oil price increases by 5% while wood pellet price increases only by 3%:

1) What is the effect on wood pellets demand? (You don't have to consider the own price elasticity.)

The change in relative price:$$\frac{\Delta p_y}{p_y} = \frac{1.05-1.03}{1.03} = 1.94\%$$

Since the cross price elasticity is 2, then:
$$\begin{aligned}\frac{\Delta D_x}{D_x} / \frac{\Delta p_y}{p_y} &= 2 \\ \frac{\Delta D_x}{D_x} &= \frac{\Delta p_y}{p_y} \times 2 \\ \frac{\Delta D_x}{D_x} &= 1.94\% \times 2 \\ &= 3.88\% \end{aligned}$$

2) Give some examples of what might influence the substitution speed.
- Law: changed is legal or not.
- Investment period: Does the change in price occur at a relevant point in time?
- Expectations: Will there be more price changes? How long will this relation be maintained?

## The international fuel market

### Oil

Oil characteristics:
- Easy to transport
- Easy to store ⇒ Not much seasonality in prices
- Relatively abundant
- Hign Energy dense
- Hign CO2 content

Oil demand:
- Chemical input for plastics and derived chemicals
- Fuel for transportation
- Energy input for general industry
- Heat and power generation

Price of it is influenced by many political, economical factors, etc.

> M. King Hubbert proposed the 'Peak oil' theory: After oil production peaks, the declining oil production has serious impacts on transport, agriculture, industry and lifestyle. But this theory failed to account for technological evolution and effects on subtitutes.

### Coal

Coal Characteristics:
- Solid Fuel
- Easy to transport long distances
- Relatively Easy to store ⇒ Not much seasonality in prices
- Abundant
- Not so energy dense
- Very high CO2 content and very polluting

Coal demand:
- Heat and power(base load)
- Marginal use in transportation
- Energy input for general industry

### Natural Gas

Gas Characteristics:
- Cheap to transport after infrastructure investment (Pipes or LNG)
- Flexible for production
- Storage is not so simple ⇒ Seasonality in prices
- Abundant in specic areas
- Variable energy density
- Relatively low CO2 content

_LNG:Liquefied natural gas_

Gas Demand:
- Industry: as chemical input
- Industry: as energy input
- Heat and power generation
- Transport ⇒ flexible

Market:
- Abundant in specic localities ⇒ few market players ⇒ Market Power
- Europe's big producer is Russia
- Security of supply concerns
- LNG minimises market power (long distance transport)
- High investment cost ⇒ Long term contracts tie the price with oil

### Biomass plus waste

Two types:
1. Edible (corn, sugar cane, sugar beet, etc.)
2. Non-edible
    - Wet (algae, manure, sludge
waste)
    - Dry (wood-pellets, willow,
straw, peat, waste)

It is a possible subtitute for coal, gas or oil in different industries.

The pirce mechanisms of it can be very complicated.

> Germany supports biogas favorably ⇒ Price for corn goes up ⇒ Problem for Danish pig farms and manure biomass production!

### More about oil products.

- Brent monthly, crude oil
Brent Crude is a major trading classification of sweet light crude oil comprising Brent Blend, Forties Blend, Oseberg and Ekofisk crudes (also known as the BFOE Quotation). Brent Crude is sourced from the North Sea. The Brent Crude oil marker is also known as Brent Blend, London Brent and Brent petroleum.
- Gas Oil 
Gas Oil is a hydrocarbon oil used as a fuel oil; especially : a petroleum distillate intermediate in boiling range and viscosity between kerosene and lubricating oil, with boiling point ranging between 160-360 ºC that are widely used to household heating systems, generators, industrial machineries and different motor engines, by off-road diesel vehicles and machinery, as a marine fuel, and as a fuel for rail locomotives.
- Fuel Oil
Fuel oil is a fraction obtained from petroleum distillation, either as a distillate or a residue. Broadly speaking, fuel oil is any liquid petroleum product that is burned in a furnace or boiler for the generation of heat or used in an engine for the generation of power. The term fuel oil is also used in a stricter sense to refer only to the heaviest commercial fuel that can be obtained from crude oil, heavier than gasoline and naphtha.
- JP1
Jet Petroleum is the highest quality product and the users (aviation) have no real substitution options. At the same time demand is growing faster than for the other refined products.

