---
title: "Optimisation in Energy"
date: 2020-09-20
categories:
- Operations Research
tags:
- DTU Courses
---
The economic dispatch problem

## Exercises
These exercises are taken from _Mathematical programming models for energy system analysis: An introduction_, the 42002 course notes.

Parts of the solutions are given by the course TA, Jorge Montalvo Arvizu's Pluto Notebook.

### Exercise 1
> Consider the economic dispatch problem for a very small power system with only two units, Unit 1 and Unit 2.

> a) Solve the economic dispatch problem for one time period. Unit 1 with minimum and maximum generation levels of 150 MW and 350 MW and production costs of 600 Euro/MW. Unit 2 with minimum and maximum generation levels of 50 MW and 500 MW and production costs of 900 Euro/MW. Demand is 600 MW.

The conditions:
$$150 \leq p_1 \leq 350\ [MW]$$
$$a_1 = 600\ [€/MW]$$
$$50 \leq p_2 \leq 500\ [MW]$$
$$a_2 = 900\ [€/MW]$$
$$d = 600\ [MW]$$

Unit 1 has a lower marginal cost and thus it produces at its max, $p_1^* = 350\ [MW]$, $p_2^* = 600 - 350 = 250\ [MW]$. 
Then the total cost is:$$z^*=350 \times 600 + 250 \times 900 = 435000 \ [€]$$

> b) Is the problem feasible for any data set? Is it bounded for any data set?

The demand should lie within the capacity of the whole system.
$$150+50 \leq d \leq 350+500\ [MW]$$
Since $p_1$ and $p_2$ are bounded, this problem is always bounded.

> c) Extend the economic dispatch problem to include **two time periods**. Demand in the first and second time periods is 600 MW and 400 MW, respectively. Solve this problem.

This problem can be solved on time period at a time. The 600 MW case is solved in a). Applying the same method for the 400 MW case yields  $p_1^* = 350\ [MW]$, $p_2^* = 50\ [MW]$. 
Then the total cost is:$z^*=350 \times 600 + 50 \times 900 = 255000 \ [€]$. 

Total cost is 690000 €.

> d) Adapt the model such that the production cost includes a variable cost of operation and maintenance $a_i^{O\&M}\ [Euro/MWh]$ of Unit i, a fuel cost $a_i^{fuel}\ [Euro/MWh]$ of Unit i and an emission costs $a_i^{emis}\ [Euro/T]$ for Unit i for i = 1; 2. Denote the amount of emissions from burning fuel by $p^{emis}\ [T/MWh]$. Extend this formulation to include a fuel eciency $\eta_i^{fuel}$ (note that the fuel eciency has an impact on both fuel and emission costs).

The new production cost is:

$$a_{i,new} = a_i^{OM} + \frac{a_i^{fuel}}{\eta_i^{fuel}} + \frac{a_i^{emis}}{\eta_i^{fuel}} \times p^{emis} \ [€/MWh]$$

where

$$0 \leq \eta_i^{fuel} \leq 1$$

> e) Introduce a constraint that forces the generation level of Unit 1 to be constant, e.g., equal to the parameter p_1^{const}or 300 MW.

$$p_1^{const} = 300\ \text{MW};\ p_1^{min} = 300 \leq p_1 \leq 300 = p_1^{max}$$

### Exercise 2
> In contrast to taking a systems perspective, consider the economic dispatch problem from the perspective of a producer. When selling production in an electricity market, most producers rely on **profit maximization** rather than cost minimization and are not obliged to meet demand. Reformulate the economic dispatch problem as a profit maximization problem by introducing market prices and ignoring the demand constraints. What does this mean for the structure of the problem in terms of solving it? (Hint: Smaller problems are usually easier to solve).

Profit maximization:

$$\begin{aligned}
    \text{max}\ \sum_{i=1}^I \sum_{t=1}^T \left( p_i-a_i\right)p_{it}&\qquad\\
    \text{s.t.}\ p_i^{min} \leq p_{it} \leq p_i^{max}&\qquad \forall i \in I,\ \forall t \in T\\
    p_{it} \geq 0&\qquad \forall i \in I,\ \forall t \in T\\
    \end{aligned}$$

where $p_i$ is the revenue, not the production.

No demand satisfaction → no unit and time coupling constraints → the problem can now be solved for each unit (one unit at-a-time) and each time period individually.

### Exercise 5
>Consider the economic dispatch model for electricity system operation. Assume that all units are dispatched in two markets; a dayahead market and an intra-day market. You can think of the day-ahead and intra-day markets as two different markets and ignore the time aspect indicated by their names (the physical dispatch of production takes place within the same time horizon for the two markets). At the day-ahead market, *forecasted* demand $d_t^{forecast}$ must be satisfied by production in every time period of the scheduling horizon. 
>
>However, since the demand forecast is not entirely correct, at the intra-day market, *realized* demand $d_t^{realized}$ must be satisfied by adjusting production in every time period. Production can be adjusted both upwards and downwards in the _intraday market_. 
>
>Reformulate the economic dispatch model to include the two markets (Hint: You will need two demand constraints and two sets of variables that takes care of production and adjustments to production, respectively).

$$\begin{aligned}
    \min & \sum_{i=1}^{I} \sum_{t=1}^{T} a_{i}\left(p_{i t}+p_{i t}^{+}-p_{i t}^{-}\right) &\qquad\\
    \text {st } & p_{i}^{\min } \leq p_{i t}+p_{i t}^{+}-p_{i t}^{-} \leq p_{i}^{\max } &\qquad \forall i \in I,\ \forall t \in T\\
    & \sum_{i=1}^{I} p_{i t}=d_{t}^{f o r e c a s t} &\qquad \forall t \in T\\
    & \sum_{i=1}^{I}\left(p_{i t}+p_{i t}^{+}-p_{i t}^{-}\right)=d_{t}^{r e a l i z e d} &\qquad \forall t \in T\\
    & p_{i t}, p_{i t}^{+}, p_{i t}^{-} \geq 0&\qquad \forall i \in I,\ \forall t \in T
    \end{aligned}$$

where $p_{it}^+$ is up-regulation and $p_{it}^-$ is down-regulation.

### Exercise 6
> Formulate the economic dispatch problem when demand is flexible, i.e., can be adjusted by the system. For example, the system operator may contact the industry to enforce a decrease of production. Include a benefit (such a benefit is usually referred to the utility of consumers) of being able to serve demand, assuming that this benefit is proportional to the amount of demand served. Is demand a parameter or a variable? Is this problem feasible for any data set?

Social costs minimization:

$$\begin{aligned}
    \min & \sum_{i=1}^{I} \sum_{t=1}^{T} a_{i}p_{i t} - \sum_{t=1}^T bd_t &\\
    \text {s.t. } & p_{i}^{\min } \leq p_{i t} \leq p_{i}^{\max } &\qquad \forall i \in I,\ \forall t \in T\\
    & \sum_{i=1}^{I} p_{i t} = d_{t}&\qquad \forall t \in T\\
    & p_{i t}, d_t \geq 0&\qquad \forall i \in I,\ \forall t \in T
    \end{aligned}$$

Or equivalently social welfare maximization:

$$ \begin{aligned}
    \max & \sum_{i=1}^{I} \sum_{t=1}^{T} \left(p_t - a_{i}\right)p_{i t} + \sum_{t=1}^T \left(b - p\right)d_t &\\
    \text {s.t. } & p_{i}^{\min } \leq p_{i t} \leq p_{i}^{\max } &\qquad \forall i \in I,\ \forall t \in T\\
    & \sum_{i=1}^{I} p_{i t} = d_{t}&\qquad \forall t \in T\\
    & p_{i t}, d_t \geq 0&\qquad \forall i \in I,\ \forall t \in T
    \end{aligned}$$

### Exercise 12
> Reformulate the demand constraint of the economic dispatch problem to account for the integration of run-of river hydro-power $p_t^{hydro}$ , solar $p_t^{solar}$, tidal $p_t^{tidal}$ and wave power $p_t^{wave}$ . Is run-of river hydro-power, solar, tidal and wave power production paramters or decision variables in the problem? Why?

$$\sum_{i=1}^I p_{it} = d_t - p_t^{wind} - p_t^{hydro} - p_t^{solar} - p_t^{tidal} - p_t^{wave}$$

 All of them are parameters since production is non-controllable (there are no decisions to be made).

 ### Exercise 13
 > Assume that wind power curtailment, i.e., a reduction of the wind power generation, is possible at a cost of, say, $a^{wind}$. Adapt the economic dispatch problem to take this into account.

 $$\begin{aligned}
    \min \sum_{i=1}^{I} &\sum_{t=1}^{T} a_{i} p_{i t}+\sum_{t=1}^{T} a^{\text {wind}} p_{t}^{\text {wind},-} &\qquad\\
    \text {st } p_{i}^{\min } &\leq p_{i t} \leq p_{i}^{\max } &\qquad \forall i \in I,\ \forall t \in T\\
    \sum_{i=1}^{I} p_{i t} &= d_{t}-\left(p_{t}^{w i n d}-p_{t}^{w i n d,-}\right) &\qquad \forall t \in T\\
    p_{t}^{\text {wind},-} &\leq p_{t}^{\text {wind}} &\qquad \forall t \in T\\
    p_{i t}, p_{t}^{w i n d,-} &\geq 0 &\qquad \forall i \in I,\ \forall t \in T
    \end{aligned}$$

where $p_t^{wind, -}$ is the reduction or curtailment of wind power in period t, and $a^{wind}$ is the cost of curtailment.