---
title: "Energy commodities, balance, and indicators"
date: 2020-09-10
categories:
- Energy Economics
tags:
- DTU Courses
---
42003 Energy Economics Lecture 4
## Energy Commodities
- Energy is needed in ALL transformation processes, in industries, small businesses, services, farming etc.
- Energy is used for most basic needs.
- Energy commodities are useless(for most of them) with transformation.
- Important substitution / dependency effects.
- Commodities are associated with the market where they are traded and are subjected to different market prices with their own trend.

> RES are not commodities as such; only when converted into electricity, heat, other.


## Enrgy Balance

**Energy balance:** Accounting framework for the compilation of data on all energy products _entering, exiting or being used_ in a country during a reference period. The EB is the tool that brings together all the data collected about energy at the country level, the _quantities_ of energy products, and their _flows_.

**Primary Energy:** All energy products available raw, unprocessed, directly exploited or imported. Primary energy comes in the form of _non-renewable stocks_ (crude oil, oil shales, natural gas, solid mineral fuels and energy from uranium fission.), _Renewable stocks_ (biomass), or _renewable flows_ (solar radiation, hydraulic energy, wind energy, geothermal energy). Encompasses domestic production, import/exports, bunkers (belonging to national marine fleet) and stocks (on the territory).

**Secondary Energy:** All energy obtained by the transformation of primary energy.

**Final Energy:** Energy used to meet final consumption needs (gasoline at the pump, electricity for heating, energy used in industrial processes, etc.).

**Gross Inland Energy Consumption:** Covers consumption by the energy sector; losses; final energy consumption by end-users.

**Useful Energy:** energy actually serving the desired use and actually available to the user after the last conversion by his own devices and equipment (overall operating efficiency). Therefore depends on the efficiency of the appliances used by the end user (boiler, automobile, etc.).

>In the UN manual, electricity from nuclear, hydro, wind and geothemal sources is labelled primary. 

>The OECD/IEA/Eurostat manual states: Electricity is produced as primary as well as secondary energy. _Primary electricity is obtained from natural sources_, such as hydro, wind, solar and tide/wave power. _Secondary electricity_ is produced from heat of nuclear fission of nuclear fuels, from the geothermal heat and solar thermal heat by burning promary combustible fuels such as coal, natural gas, oil and renewables and wastes.

### Energy Units
- Joule: only internationally legally recognized energy.
- Ton of oil equivalent(toe):most evocative unit that economists use in their energy balances.(including Ktoe, Mtoe...)

## Energy Indicators
Why need it?
- To measure and compare energy usages by countries or sectors of economy.
- To examine the development in energy consumption: _Intensity, efficiency, emissions_.

### Energy Intensity
>Energy intensity is a measure of the energy efficiency of a country’s economy, measured in terms of primary energy and GDP. It corresponds to the energy needed to produce 1 unit of activity.

-----

_I will carry on if I feel like it. Tired here. Not much thing to write here._

### Enrgy Efficiency

### Energy Emissions 

## Exercise 

